docs: update tutorials and how-tos to use pytest-jubilant (#2406)
canonical/operator: docs/howto/write-integration-tests-for-a-charm.md

- [cassandra-operator](https://github.com/canonical/cassandra-operator/blob/main/tests/integration/test_charm.py)
- [httpbin-demo](https://github.com/canonical/operator/blob/main/examples/httpbin-demo/tests/integration/test_charm.py)

> Tests run sequentially in the order they are written in the file. It can be useful to put tests that deploy applications in the top of the file as the applications can be used by other tests. You can mark such tests with `@pytest.mark.juju_setup` -- if you later use `--no-juju-setup` to skip them, the model must already exist (see {ref}`run-your-tests` below). Adding extra checks or `asserts` in deployment tests is not recommended.

Author: Good idea, thanks. I think we should update our recommendation about extra checks here, as I find it a bit confusing right now. In fact, I think we should drop it.

I think the intent is that you shouldn't have a `test_deploy_and_thing1` test, and a `test_thing2` test, but rather a `test_deploy`, and `test_thing1` and a `test_thing2`. But the recommendation feels a bit counter productive -- we actually would like to assert everything in `test_deploy` that needs to be in place for the subsequent tests to run so that we're not tracing such errors across multiple tests to figure out what went wrong with deployment.

```suggestion
Tests run sequentially in the order they are written in the file. It can be useful to put tests that deploy applications in the top of the file so the applications can be used by subsequent tests.

You can mark such tests with `@pytest.mark.juju_setup`. If you later use `--no-juju-setup` to skip the deployment tests, the model must already exist. See {ref}`run-your-tests`.
```

### Use several models

You can use Jubilant with several models, in the same cloud or in
different clouds. This way you can, for example, integrate machine charms
with Kubernetes charms easily.
If you need multiple Juju models in a single test module, use the `juju_factory` fixture provided by `pytest-jubilant`:

```python
    model_a = jubilant.Juju("some-model")
    model_b = jubilant.Juju("another-controller:a-model")

>     new_model = jubilant.Juju().add_model("a-model", "some-cloud", controller=..., config=..., credential=...)

Author: On reflection, I agree with Tony about this approach. Let's see if we get requests on `pytest-jubilant` or elsewhere for more cross-model/cloud support in testing.

    return juju_factory.get_juju(suffix="other")
```

> Each call to `get_juju` creates a separate model. You can then use both `juju` and `other_model` in the same test. This is useful for cross-model scenarios, for example integrating machine charms with Kubernetes charms.

Reviewer: How about adding another example:

```suggestion
Each call to `get_juju` creates a separate model. You can then use both `juju` and `other_model` in the same test. This is useful for cross-model scenarios. For example integrating machine charms with Kubernetes charms, or integrating with the [Canonical Observability Stack](https://charmhub.io/cos-lite).
```

| `--no-juju-teardown` | Keep models after the tests finish, instead of destroying them. Also skips tests marked with `@pytest.mark.juju_teardown`. |
| `--no-juju-setup` | Skip tests marked with `@pytest.mark.juju_setup` (for example, deployment tests). The model must already exist. Requires `--juju-model`. |
| `--juju-switch` | Switch to the active test model, so you can monitor it with `juju status` in another terminal. |
| `--juju-dump-logs [PATH]` | Dump `juju debug-log` output to disk for each model. Defaults to `.logs/`. |

If any tests fail, `pytest-jubilant` automatically prints the last 1000 lines of `juju debug-log` to stderr, even without `--juju-dump-logs`.

````{tip}
Use `--juju-dump-logs` in CI with `actions/upload-artifact` to make debug logs available as build artifacts:

```yaml
  # In your integration test job
  - run: tox -e integration -- --juju-dump-logs
  - name: Upload logs
    if: ${{ !cancelled() }}

>     uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4

Reviewer 2: The latest version is v7; we should use that rather than v4. It'll date, and people shouldn't copy this exactly, and dependabot (etc) should point out newer versions, but better to start with something current.

    with:
      name: juju-dump-logs
      path: .logs
```
````

> 

Reviewer: actions/upload-artifact is now on v7

> 

Author: Thanks for checking this! I wonder if we just need a trailing `/` for `path: .logs/`.

> 

Reviewer: Hmm, no, I still see the same thing:

> No files were found with the provided path: .logs/. No artifacts will be uploaded.

https://github.com/dwilding/fastapi-demo-k8s-operator/actions/runs/24171936118?pr=4

> 

Author: As we discovered, it turns out that with the default location of `.logs`, you need to tell `upload-artifact` to include hidden files, or it doesn't include the hidden directory you explicitly tell it to upload.

I wonder if we should consider changing the default dump location to avoid this tripping up charmers, but this would technically be a breaking change.

Separately, I think we should explicitly set the log location in the profiles and our recommendations. I've done that for this example. This has the benefit of letting us change the default location with less breakage.

> - [`pytest | How to invoke pytest`](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.1.x/how-to/usage.html)
> - [](#validate-your-charm-with-every-change)

> ## View Juju logs

Reviewer: Please could you add a target here? I'd like to link to this section from the CI how-to that I'm preparing.

```suggestion
(write-integration-tests-for-a-charm-view-juju-logs)=
## View Juju logs
```

If any tests fail, `pytest-jubilant` automatically prints the last 1000 lines of `juju debug-log` to stderr. You can also save the complete logs to disk with the `--juju-dump-logs` option.

> ````{tip}

Author: ```suggestion
```
